Make `MeasureTime` output trace files (#915)
browserengineering/book: book/scheduling.md

        self.file.flush()
```

A trace file is just a JSON object with a `traceEvents`
field[^and-other-fields] which contains a list of trace events. The
`ph` and `name` fields of the trace event are the most important.
Here, we write a trace event with a `ph` of `M` and a `name` of
`process_name`, which means this record changes the process name
displayed by the tracing tool (passed in the `args`). Since our
browser only has one process, I just pass `1` for the process ID, and
the `cat`egory has to be `__metadata` for metadata trace events. The
`ts` field stores a timestamp; since this is the first event, it'll
set the start time for the whole trace, so it's important to put in
the actual current time.

Updating the process name isn't that important, but writing an initial
trace event conveniently means every later trace event will need to be
preceded by a comma. So let's add those later trace events. We
specifically want `B` and `E` events, which mark the beginning and end
of some interesting computation:

``` {.python replace=1%7d/%27%20%2b%20str(tid)%20%2b%20%27%7d}
class MeasureTime:
    def start(self, name):
        ts = time.time() * 1000000

>         self.file.write(

Author: That's a good question. The benefit of doing it manually is we can stream out JSON, which chrome://tracing and Perfetto can handle (not Firefox). This also means that if you kill the browser you'll still get stuff written out.

help me debug---are already safely on disk.[^invalid-json]

[^invalid-json]: Some of the tracing tools listed above actually
accept invalid JSON files, in case the trace comes from a browser
crash.

Now we can use `MeasureTime` to measure how long various browser
components take. We create it in the `Browser`:

``` {.python}
class Browser:
    def __init__(self):
        self.measure = MeasureTime("browser.trace")
```

We'll measure the time for something like raster and draw by just
calling `start` and `stop`:

``` {.python}
class Browser:
    def raster_and_draw(self):
        # ...
        self.measure.start('raster/draw')
        self.raster_chrome()
        self.raster_tab()
        self.draw()
        self.measure.stop('raster/draw')
        # ...
```

We can also measure tab rendering:

``` {.python}
class Tab:
    def render(self):
        if not self.needs_render: return
        self.browser.measure.start('render')
        # ...
        self.browser.measure.stop('render')
```

We close out the trace file when the browser stops:

``` {.python}
class Browser:
    def handle_quit(self):
        self.measure.close()
```

> Naturally you'll need to call this methods before quitting, from the main

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Naturally you'll need to call this method before quitting, from the main
```

To start, let's wrap the actual file and format in a class:

``` {.python}
class MeasureTime:
    def __init__(self, filename):
        self.file = open(filename, "w")
        self.file.write('{"traceEvents": [')
        ts = time.time() * 1000000
        self.file.write(
            '{ "name": "process_name",' +
            '"ph": "M",' +
            '"ts": ' + str(ts) + ',' +
            '"pid": 1, "cat": "__metadata",' +
            '"args": {"name": "Browser"}}')
        self.file.flush()
```

A trace file is just a JSON object with a `traceEvents`
field[^and-other-fields] which contains a list of trace events. The
`ph` and `name` fields of the trace event are the most important.
Here, we write a trace event with a `ph` of `M` and a `name` of
`process_name`, which means this record changes the process name
displayed by the tracing tool (passed in the `args`). Since our
browser only has one process, I just pass `1` for the process ID, and
the `cat`egory has to be `__metadata` for metadata trace events. The
`ts` field stores a timestamp; since this is the first event, it'll
set the start time for the whole trace, so it's important to put in
the actual current time.

> Updating the process name isn't that important, but writing an initial

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Updating the process name isn't that important^[It would be important only for
a multi-process browser!], but writing an initial
```

trace event conveniently means every later trace event will need to be
preceded by a comma. So let's add those later trace events. We
specifically want `B` and `E` events, which mark the beginning and end
of some interesting computation:

``` {.python replace=1%7d/%27%20%2b%20str(tid)%20%2b%20%27%7d}
class MeasureTime:
    def start(self, name):
        ts = time.time() * 1000000
        self.file.write(
            ', { "ph": "B", "cat": "_",' +
            '"name": "' + name + '",' +
            '"ts": ' + str(ts) + ',' +
            '"pid": 1, "tid": 1}')
        self.file.flush()
```

Here the `name` argument to `start` should describe what kind of
computation is starting, and it needs to match the name passed to the
corresponding `stop` event:

``` {.python replace=1%7d/%27%20%2b%20str(tid)%20%2b%20%27%7d}
class MeasureTime:
    def stop(self, name):
        ts = time.time() * 1000000
        self.file.write(
            ', { "ph": "E", "cat": "_",' +
            '"name": "' + name + '",' +
            '"ts": ' + str(ts) + ',' +
            '"pid": 1, "tid": 1}')
        self.file.flush()
```

> Finally, when we shut down the browser, we want to leave the file a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, when finishing tracing (e.g. when closing the browser), leave the file a
```

valid JSON file:

``` {.python}
class MeasureTime:
    def close(self):
        self.file.write(']}')
        self.file.close()
```

Note that I call `flush` every time I write to the file. This makes
sure that if the browser crashes, all of the log events---which might
help me debug---are already safely on disk.[^invalid-json]

[^invalid-json]: Some of the tracing tools listed above actually
accept invalid JSON files, in case the trace comes from a browser
crash.

Now we can use `MeasureTime` to measure how long various browser

> components take. We create it in the `Browser`:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
components take. Create it in the `Browser`:
```

``` {.python}
class Browser:
    def __init__(self):
        self.measure = MeasureTime("browser.trace")
```

We'll measure the time for something like raster and draw by just
calling `start` and `stop`:

``` {.python}
class Browser:
    def raster_and_draw(self):
        # ...
        self.measure.start('raster/draw')
        self.raster_chrome()
        self.raster_tab()
        self.draw()
        self.measure.stop('raster/draw')
        # ...
```

We can also measure tab rendering:

``` {.python}
class Tab:
    def render(self):
        if not self.needs_render: return
        self.browser.measure.start('render')
        # ...
        self.browser.measure.stop('render')
```

> We close out the trace file when the browser stops:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And close out the trace file when the browser stops:
```

``` {.python}
class Browser:
    def handle_quit(self):
        self.measure.close()
```

Naturally you'll need to call this method before quitting, from the

> main event loop, so it has a chance to print its timing data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
main event loop, so it has a chance to close out the JSON.
```

Fire up the server, open our timer script, wait for it to finish
counting, and then exit the browser. Then open up Chrome tracing or
one of the other tracing tools named above and load the trace. You
should see something like this:

::: {.todo}
Need screenshots
:::

> In Chrome tracing, you can choosing the cursor icon from the toolbar

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In Chrome tracing, you can choose the cursor icon from the toolbar
```

        # ...

    def start(self, name):
        self.lock.acquire(blocking=True)
        # ...
        self.lock.release()

    def stop(self, name):
        self.lock.acquire(blocking=True)
        # ...
        self.lock.release()

    def close(self):
        self.lock.acquire(blocking=True)
        # ...
        self.lock.release()
```

Next, in every trace event, we'll want to provide a real thread ID in
the `tid` field, which we can get by calling `get_ident` from the
`threading` library:

``` {.python}
class MeasureTime:
    def start(self, name):
        # ...
        tid = threading.get_ident()
        self.file.write(
            ', { "ph": "B", "cat": "_",' +
            '"name": "' + name + '",' +
            '"ts": ' + str(ts) + ',' +
            '"pid": 1, "tid": ' + str(tid) + '}')
        # ...
```

Do the same thing in `stop`. Now, if you make a new trace from the
counting animation and load it into one of the tracing tools, you
should see something like this:

::: {.todo}
Trace
:::

You can see how the render and raster tasks now happen on different
threads, and how our multi-threaded architecture allows them to happen
concurrently.

::: {.further}

> 

Reviewer: I can write something for this if you want, about how important tracing has been for Chrome's performance optimization work over the years.

Author: That would be really great.

:::

Threaded profiling
==================

Now that we have two threads, we'll want to be able to visualize this
in the traces we produce. Luckily, the Chrome tracing format supports
that. First of all, we'll want to make the `MeasureTime` methods
thread-safe, so they can be called from either thread:

``` {.python}
class MeasureTime:
    def __init__(self, filename):
        self.lock = threading.Lock()
        # ...

    def start(self, name):
        self.lock.acquire(blocking=True)
        # ...
        self.lock.release()

    def stop(self, name):
        self.lock.acquire(blocking=True)
        # ...
        self.lock.release()

    def close(self):
        self.lock.acquire(blocking=True)
        # ...
        self.lock.release()
```

Next, in every trace event, we'll want to provide a real thread ID in
the `tid` field, which we can get by calling `get_ident` from the
`threading` library:

``` {.python}
class MeasureTime:
    def start(self, name):
        # ...
        tid = threading.get_ident()

>         self.file.write(

Reviewer: You should be able to name the thread with one of the fields available.

Reviewer: ?

            ', { "ph": "B", "cat": "_",' +
            '"name": "' + name + '",' +
            '"ts": ' + str(ts) + ',' +
            '"pid": 1, "tid": ' + str(tid) + '}')
        # ...
```

Do the same thing in `stop`. Now, if you make a new trace from the
counting animation and load it into one of the tracing tools, you
should see something like this:

::: {.todo}
Trace
:::

You can see how the render and raster tasks now happen on different
threads, and how our multi-threaded architecture allows them to happen
concurrently.

::: {.further}

> :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The tracing system we introduced in this chapter comes directly from real browsers. And it's
used every day by browser engineers to understand the performance characteristics of
the browser in different situations, find bottlenecks, and fix them. Without these tools,
browsers would not have been able to make many of the performance leaps they did in
recent years. Good debugging tools are essential to software engineering!

:::
```
